Description of challenge 

With the ever-growing number of reported potholes (more than 25,000 in 2023) and other road network faults it has become essential to provide the public with a new, more accurate application to report faults they discover or have been affected by. Compensation claims relating to potholes in particular have also been on the rise, with insurers reporting a rise of 40% in 2023. Therefore, there is a requirement to provide members of the public with an application to apply for compensation from the Department for Infrastructure (DFI).  

Furthermore, there is a need for DFI to more accurately monitor and prioritise faults on the road network. With the numbers of reported faults and compensation claims growing combined with budget constraints the department needs to plan repairs in a more sustainable way taking preventative measures where possible to reduce the damage caused by road network faults. This entails developing a more accurate prioritisation of faults as they are reported and reducing the amount of time it takes for contractors to carry out repairs. Once more, as contractors are now repairing multiple different faults in various locations each day, there is a need for improving the order in which the faults are visited and rectified by enhancing route planning to each fault to make the repair process as efficient as possible. 


Project Aim 

One aim of the project is to provide the public with an enhanced, more accessible and user-friendly application to both report faults and submit compensation claims if necessary. This will involve merging the both the current processes into one seamless experience for users.  

Another aim of the project is to provide DFI with an application to improve the monitoring and management of faults, repairs, and compensation claims. The application will aim to provide the department with an enhanced ability to prioritise faults and process claims, along with the ability to use reporting and monitoring to better plan preventative action and identify hotspots. 

The project also aims to provide contractors with the ability to view assigned repair jobs in more efficient and prioritised manner. Furthermore, the project will aim to aid contractors in planning routes to each job and the order that they visit jobs on any given day. The location of their base of operations, the location of each of the jobs, and the priority of each of the jobs will be used in this instance to plot routes. 


Intellectual Property Consideration 

The major intellectual property consideration for this project is the data gathered from the map provider. Originally Google Maps API was considered as the map provider however the company places various restrictions on the storage of gathered data including only permitting the storage of geocodes (lat, lng) for up to 30 consecutive days. I deemed this restriction to unfeasible for the aims of the project and therefore I made the decision to instead use Microsoft Azure Maps as the map provider. Azure Maps again imposes restrictions on the storage of gathered data, however the storage of geocodes is permitted so long as they are used only within the application being developed. To ensure compliance with Azure Maps terms of use etc. the only data gathered from provided maps to be stored will be the geocode information and basic address/road information and the data will not be utilised outside the scope of the project. 

Indicative hardware and software resources to be utilized within the project. (NB Ensure that there are no restrictions or similar on acquiring or accessing these resources and appropriate support is in place for the duration of the project) 

The IDE for the development of the project will be Visual Studio 2022 Professional which is provided through my employer. Visual Studio Code may also be used in some instances. SQL Server Management Studio will be used to create and manage the database for the project during development, again this is provided through my employer. Furthermore, various Microsoft Azure Cloud Services may be used, a subscription to Azure is provided through my university student account. Azure Maps Service will be used as the mapping provider for the project. There is also the potential for both .NetCore web apps, the API, and the database to be deployed and hosted on Azure Cloud. In this instance Azure SQL Server and SQL Database will be used to host the database and Azure App Service will be used to host both applications and the API. 

Consideration of Risk 

There is the risk of breaking terms of use of the Azure Maps Service regarding the storage of data gathered from the service. As previously stated, to mitigate this risk only very specific data that complies with terms of use policies will be stored. 

The risk of spiralling costs in using the services provided by Azure is important to consider. Azure Maps Service is relatively cost effective as it caches map tiles etc. to reduce the number of calls to the map API. Furthermore, it is a relatively cheap service to use operating on a pay-as-you-go basis, and costs can be monitored. From previous experience Azure SQL Services can be used relatively cheaply depending on the configuration of the services. On the other hand, I have limited experience in the hosting of .NetCore applications on Azure Cloud and there is the risk that cost of hosting may prove to be too great. To mitigate this risk, I have decided to make the hosting of the applications and API a desirable but not essential requirement of the project. I plan to deploy and test the applications and API on Azure Clouds App Service and monitor the cost. If it proves to be too expensive, I will discontinue use of the service. 

Requirements creep I deem to be a major risk of the project. With my experience of working with stakeholders I know that as the development of the project progresses and users begin testing, they can begin to request new requirements and additional functionality which can negatively impact on project deadlines etc. To mitigate this risk a thorough requirements gathering process will be carried out at the beginning of the project and an Agile development methodology with be used throughout the project lifecycle meaning the addition of requirements and new functionality can be more efficiently managed. 

Access to the application and stored data is also a risk. Personal information will be stored in relation to members of the public who report faults and submit claims, along with information on contractors and the repair work they carryout. DFI staff information will also be stored. To mitigate the risk of a data breach or unauthorised access all users will be required to login to the applications. Members of the public and contractors will be required to create an account through the public facing application and DFI staff access will be managed through the internal administration application. There will also be the addition of a role management process for the internal administration application meaning staff access can be managed and controlled. To comply with GDPR legislation once a repair and/or corresponding claim has been processed any personal data stored will be cleansed and only basic information relating to the repair itself will be retained. 
